Generating Julia function for log density evaluation (#278)
TuringLang/JuliaBUGS.jl: docs/src/source_gen.md

The valid sequential version requires *loop fission*:
```julia
for i in 1:N
    x[i] ~ normal(0, 1)     # (1)
end
for i in 1:N    
    y[i] ~ normal(x[N], i)  # (2) 
end
```

But this not totally satisfactory, because ideally we would want to be able to tell if we don't have to fission all the loops like Version 1 of `Rats`.

This shows the statement dependence graph alone is not quite sufficient. We need to analyze dependencies within loops more precisely using iteration spaces and dependence vectors. This allows transformations like loop fission (used in Version 2 of `Rats`).

**Iteration Space and Vectors**

Consider this loop:
```julia
for i in 1:2
    for j in 1:3
        x[i] ~ normal(0, j)     # (1)
        y[i] ~ normal(x[2], i)  # (2) 
    end
end
```

Each execution of the loop body corresponds to an *iteration vector* $\vec{k} = (i, j)$. The set of all possible iteration vectors is the *iteration space*, here $\{(i, j) | 1 \le i \le 2, 1 \le j \le 3\}$. Iterations execute sequentially in lexicographical order: (1,1), (1,2), (1,3), (2,1), (2,2), (2,3).

**Dependence Vectors**

> If a statement execution at iteration $\vec{i}$ (source) defines a value used by a statement execution at iteration $\vec{j}$ (sink), the *dependence vector* is $\vec{d} = \vec{j} - \vec{i}$. It represents the distance between dependent iterations. (Sometimes, we don't care about the number, so we can simply use the sign of the dependence vector.)

Author: ```suggestion
If a statement execution at iteration $\vec{i}$ (source) defines a value used by a statement execution at iteration $\vec{j}$ (sink), the *dependence vector* is $\vec{d} = \vec{j} - \vec{i}$. It represents the distance between dependent iterations. (Sometimes, we don't care about the distance between define and use, so we can simply use the sign of the elements of the dependence vector to represent the dependence relation.)
```

    end

    subgraph InitialState
        S3["(S3) s[1] ~ dcat(pi[1:K])"]
    end

    subgraph MainLoop [for i in 1:T]
        S1["(S1) s[i] ~ dcat(transition[s[i-1], 1:K])"]
        S2["(S2) Y[i] ~ dnorm(mu[s[i]], tau[s[i]])"]
    end

    S7 --> S3
    S6 --> S1
    S3 --> S1
    S1 -- loop-carried --> S1
    S4 --> S2
    S5 --> S2
    S1 --> S2

    %% Note: alpha is assumed to be an input/hyperparameter
```

In this example, there is a self loop on `S1`. These represent the state transition.
To see that we can actually sequentially execute the program, we can compute the dependence vectors.

The computation of the dependence vectors is done in the following steps:
When executing the for loop from `i = 2` to `i = T`, we need to compute the dependence vector. Let's examine the case when `i = 2`:

- LHS: `s[2]` is defined at iteration `i=2`
- RHS: `s[1]` is defined at iteration `i=1`
- Dependence vector: $\vec{d} = \vec{j}_{sink} - \vec{i}_{source} = (2) - (1) = (1)$

All subsequent iterations follow the same pattern and have the same dependence vector of $(1)$. Because all dependence vectors are lexicographically non-negative, the loop is sequentially valid.

> This requires storing the loop variable `i` for each variable, but we already computed this with JuliaBUGS compilation, so not much overhead is required. 

Reviewer: To make sure I'm understanding this properly: as part of the compilation, you step through the loop and on each iteration you calculate the dependency vector for the variables in the loop?

Author: Currently, we don't compute the dependence vector. But we store the values of loop inductions variables for each variables in the model.

It should be noted that this approach doesn't scale well for general Julia programs, but it works appropriately for BUGS since the compilation process already has a time complexity of $O(N)$ with respect to the number of variables.

It is worth pause here and give a summary:
    
To transform a BUGS program into a sequentially valid program, we will only apply two simple transformations, loop fission and statement reordering. These transformations will not need to modify loop bounds, renaming variables, adding any control flow, or make any changes to specific statements.

A program that can be transformed are determined by the following procedure:

First a statement dependence graph is computed.

If the statement dependence graph is acyclic, then we topologically sort the statements and fission all the loops to create a sequentially valid program.

In case the statement dependence graph is not acyclic.
If the statements that form a cycle are all from the same loop (potentially at different nested levels), then we compute the dependence vectors to determine if the loop is sequentially valid. 

Otherwise, the program need to be rewritten.

> We don't attempt to apply further transformations to the program, because it is a hard problem. And to give a flavor of the difficulty of rewriting programs, let's consider the following example:

Author: ```suggestion
We don't attempt to apply further transformations to the program, because it is a hard problem. We will use the following example to show why program transformations can be a difficult task. We will not attempt to implement the transformation demonstrated here.

Consider this model,
```

> 

Reviewer: If I understand right, the examples that follow this sentence are programmes that will be rejected?

If so, I think it might be worth making this really explicit.

Author: That's correct. Thanks!

for i = 2 to N # Or a similar loop structure covering all indices
   if i is even:
       # Calculate x[i] (originally S3) - needs sumX[i-1]
       x[i] ~ dnorm(sumX[i-1], tau)
   else: # i is odd
       # Calculate x[i] (originally S4) - needs sumX[i-1]
       x[i] ~ dgamma(sumX[i-1], tau) 
   
   # Calculate sumX[i] (originally S2) - needs x[i] just calculated
   sumX[i] = sumX[i-1] + x[i]
end
```

Another example is where data is involved in computing the indices.

```julia
begin
    z[2] = f(x[1]) # (S1)
    y[2] = g(x[3]) # (S2)

    for i in 1:3
        x[i] = y[a[i]] + z[b[i]] # (S3)
    end
end

data = (a = [2, 3, 1], b = [3, 1, 2])
```

this results in the following dependencies

```julia
x[1] <- y[2], z[3]
x[2] <- y[3], z[1]
x[3] <- y[1], z[2]
z[2] <- x[1]
y[2] <- x[2]
```

```mermaid
graph TD
    S1["S1: z[2] = f(x[1])"] --> S3_1["S3: x[1] = y[a[1]] + z[b[1]]"]
    S1 --> S3_3["S3: x[3] = y[a[3]] + z[b[3]]"]
    
    S2["S2: y[2] = g(x[3])"] --> S3_1
    
    S3_1 --> S1
    S3_2["S3: x[2] = y[a[2]] + z[b[2]]"] --> S2
    S3_3 --> S2
    
    subgraph "Loop dependencies"
        S3_1 --> S3_2
        S3_2 --> S3_3
        S3_3 --> S3_1
    end
```

> This represents a worst case where we can't do much better than fully unrolling.

Reviewer: (Continued from above) Because this sentence doesn't entirely make it clear whether the model can be run after the loop is unrolled. As I understand it, this dependency graph is cyclic (even after unrolling).

Author: I updated the example to make it more clear (the fully unrolled version should not be cyclic, unless I made a dumb mistake)

## Lowering BUGS programs into Julia programs that compute the log density

The Version 2 of `Rats` program is:

```julia
quote
    var"beta.tau" ~ dgamma(0.001, 0.001)
    var"beta.c" ~ dnorm(0.0, 1.0e-6)
    var"alpha.tau" ~ dgamma(0.001, 0.001)
    var"alpha.c" ~ dnorm(0.0, 1.0e-6)
    alpha0 = var"alpha.c" - xbar * var"beta.c"
    var"tau.c" ~ dgamma(0.001, 0.001)
    sigma = 1 / sqrt(var"tau.c")
    for i = 1:30
        beta[i] ~ dnorm(var"beta.c", var"beta.tau")
    end
    for i = 1:30
        alpha[i] ~ dnorm(var"alpha.c", var"alpha.tau")
    end
    for i = 1:30
        for j = 1:5
            mu[i, j] = alpha[i] + beta[i] * (x[j] - xbar)
        end
    end
    for i = 1:30
        for j = 1:5
            Y[i, j] \eqsim dnorm(mu[i, j], var"tau.c")
        end
    end
end
```

> We made a simple change to the program to prepare for lowering: we need to distinguish between observations and model parameters (because they correspond to different code). We introduce a new operator into the program `\eqsim` to indicate that the left hand side is an observation.

Reviewer: Personally, I don't think I'm entirely comfortable with eqsim; I think it looks too much like an ordinary equals, and also it's hard to type.

I think something like `~=` would be better for my eyes - would you be ok with that?

Author: absolutely agree -- I think Unicode characters can be good to look at, but annoying to type (particularly if not in an IDE)

right now, this is pretty internal, but maybe JuliaBUGS can expose this in the future, then this "lowering" function can just turn a Julia AST into a logdensity function. but we can have a proper discussion on what to use thn
